Okay, so hello, I'm Pavel Machek and I'm here to talk about cameras, but you can also talk
to me about clicker train horses, mobile phones, kernel, smartwatch based on ESP32, Mobian
or Malmo Vastar. So first thing first, video phones is not for cameras, it's for frame
zebras and they are really very different, which is basically what this talk will be
about. They can do remote controls, but they cannot do autofocus for you and so on. But
the interface is fairly simple, you just open the video zero, select format and capture.
Unfortunately what you get is blurry photo, which will be either all white or all black.
This is with autofocus and auto something. Anyway, there are phones with smart sensors,
one such example is pine phone and those are pretty close to the frame zebras. They do
basically everything in hardware. This used to be a pretty common design in the past,
which made a good sense at this point because USB had limited bandwidth and you could not
push uncompressed data through it. It's easy to standardize, but it doesn't make much sense
today. If you have like five lens on your phone, you don't want to have five JPEG and
what can I call this there? So we are moving to dump sensors, which basically do bare minimum.
There use parameters like exposure, gain, select area and so on. And it just passes
the bare data over the fast bus and it usually ends up in your memory. And then you have
component called ESP, which is image signal processor, which will do the JPEG conversion
and such stuff. Unfortunately in case of the interesting phones, which is official Librem
5, Pine Phone and Pine Phone Pro, we either don't have the processor or we don't have
drivers for that. So this is how the image, this is a photo if you try to take it without
the automatics. Can you recognize what's there? It's a USB connector. It's recognizable, I'd
say. So what do we need to do? Nokia N900 is another example of complex design, which used
to be very important historically. And actually the photos in the presentation are from N900
with open source. In the real time, you need to do auto exposure because otherwise you
will have black or white frame and you need auto exposure for auto focus. On most cameras
you really want auto focus too because you can just focus to infinity and expect good
image. And that's pretty much everything you need to do for the video recording in the
real time. Then you have preview. Preview is a bit less important than the video recording,
but it's also important. You will need to convert from buyer to RGB and you need to
do gamma correction because the sensors are linear in one side and exponential on the
other side. GPU can help here. And then there are extensive post processing steps like auto
white balance, lens shading compensation, getting rid of bad pixels and probably many
others I forgot about. Advantage of this is that this can be done after taking photos
or after the video. And they are quite good tools for that, including rotaryp, euro and
so on. So people were working unlike the other parts. This got some work done before. So
what we are talking, for example, on the N900 you have LED flash, which is completely independent
device. You have voice coils support for auto focus, which is again, it's a powered device
somewhere on I2C. Then you have two sensors, front and back camera. You have GPIO switch
to select which camera you want. And then you have ISP, which is quite a complex piece
of hardware, which will not be important for this presentation because it will do without
it. So tools to use. There is a great set of tools to use, but they have some limitations
each. One which looks very nice is Gstreamer. And Gstreamer is really great if you have
an unlimited CPU. Unfortunately, you don't have unlimited CPU. It's like if I was willing
to hack its C code, it would be very powerful. But there is some learning curve involved
in that too. And at the end, Gstreamer might be right to use, but I found other tools easier.
There's FFF pack, which has quite nice and very simple command line interface. So I used
it at the end. I didn't really need much. Just please take these images and compress
me every video from there. There's megapixels. Megapixels is a very nice application focused
on mobile phone, very well optimized, but its origin is pine phone and they don't use
left camera there. So, not quite suitable. Then there's left camera. Everybody says left
camera is future of video on Linux. It probably is, but there are still many steps to get
there. And there's megapixels. Megapixels is fork of megapixels, which is ported to Libram
5 and to lead camera more importantly. So in many ways, so megapixels actually currently
looks nicer because it is based on newer GTK. On the other hand, megapixels use lead camera
and that's important stuff. Okay. So this will be a bit of history and reasons and so
on. I started to play with camera on pine phone and first idea was, hey, Gstreamer is
there to capture video. Let's use Gstreamer, right? Okay. I started capturing raw bare
data because that's what should be most portable. I did some shell scripting, media control
to set up the pipelines. That's not fun. And then just use Gstreamer to save the bare images
to the disk and I could do 200 kilopixels, which is not great, but better than no video
at all maybe. And I realized that CPU can compress at 70 kilopixels images in real time,
which is, well, people were doing this, but it's some time ago. So I tried to improve.
There is IOVU format, the camera could do, which is the bare and converted to like for
better processing. And I could capture up to 0.9 megapixel video with that. And if you
were wanted, you could can take a look there. Maybe it's useful for someone, but well, there
was a reason. The reason was called corrimatory and someone in Gstreamer decided to do a regression
basically and all the Gstreamer stuff stopped working. And I realized that well, perhaps
it wasn't good, too great to start with anyway. So I started looking around quickly. I found
a lit camera, which is the future, right? And well, it's C++. It didn't work at all
on pine phones. So I had to do some quite heavy patching. I get some help on the mailing
list and I realized it has JPEG support, which is well, you avoid a lot of stuff because
if JPEGs are already called space converted and compressed and so on, and I realized that
maybe JPEG is work having second look. So I did. You can save data into megapixel resolution
to flash because the flash is not fast enough, but it was like almost possible. So hey, JPEGs
are four times smaller. Perhaps this could be adjusted and saving some this easy. So
maybe we can, well, maybe we already have everything we need. And this is why how Unix
camera was born. I realized second reason someone decided that pacing uncached data
to user space is fun thing to do and the camera decided that passing a memory up to the application
is great. I saw someone told my CPU because the performance penalty is about 10 times,
but not it's just the way it is. I believe this needs to be fixed. If you fight with
the streamer and the performance seems too bad, this is probably why it's too bad. And
why I don't know, talk to your kind of person which can change it. By the way, in the old
days we used to have a read interface to get data from the camera. This is deprecated.
Of course it is faster to read the data than to get an cache memory, right? That's how
badly uncached memory sucks. Anyway, so Unix camera started. Audio is really simple. You
just create a small application to sound record sound, split it to chunks so you can have
easy processing later and timestamp them, which is important for synchronization. Live
camera with some small hacks can write 35 frames per second to megapixel this data to
the file system. All you need to do is edit timestamp and sim link so your preview can
tell you which is the latest image. Very easy. Control application, you probably don't want
to start your video recognition from command line, but that's also very easy. You just
take some GTK and Python. It creates timestamps, tailing, hey, start recognition now, and displays
preview which is the most intensive thing there. This is basically what runs during
the recording. This is to be a bit optimized. Post processing is not that important, right?
So you just use Python to compress the resulting video stream. This is something I was pretty
happy about. If you want to duplicate it, you will need some setup like patching the
camera and so on, but code is out there and there will be easier method in future. So
I like the solution because I could use multiple languages to do my camera recording, write
language for the job. In the end, this was few hundreds of lines of code total. And it
could do some quite interesting stuff, like you could take still pictures during recording.
You simply copy the JTAG one more time. Easy. In video resolution, but if you are recording
it at two megapixels from phone camera, I'd say this is going to be pretty decent picture
anyway. You could take photos with arbitrary delay. You could even take photos before the
user asked for them because you are taking all of them anyway, so you just don't delete
them. This was fun. Then I've got access to Libram 5, which is different in important
ways. It has dump sensor, so it won't give you JPEG. But it had better support. Let camera
work there out of the box. There was millipix application. As I explained about before,
it matched megapixels, but it had no auto exposure, auto weight balance or auto focus
support. It couldn't report video. And there's more issues on Libram 5. Can you use some
work? It only gives you 8-bit data, which is not really good enough for good photos.
You can select one of these three resolutions, so megapixels, 3 megapixels or 13 megapixels.
And for some reason, only 23.5 frames per second work. I don't know why. Hardware has
face detection auto focus, which is a very cool sounding toy. And I have to thank Purism
for their hardware and for the great work they did on the software stack. They are heroes.
This is the best photo I got with Nokia 900. So millipixels. They are very simple application.
There's small development teams, so it's easy to work with. It's plain C. It's easy to merge
patches. It does all the processing on the CPU, which is great if you want to change
the processing. So I started to do auto exposure because that's the most important part. And
I did a very simple one. I prototyped on N900 years ago. So basically, if you have too much,
two white pixels overexposed, you need to turn down the exposure. And if you don't have
enough white enough pixels, you need to turn the exposure up. And this is it. And this
works well enough. It takes a few seconds to converge. It can be improved. I don't know
how to do that, but this is good enough to take photos. Other thing is auto white balance.
This is not that important because you can do it in post-processing. Anyway, they did
have manual white balance, so I felt it is easy enough to do. It will need some more
work. Again, if it's too blue, you make it more red. If it's too red, you make it more
blue. That's it. It works well enough. And in a few hundred lines of code, I had simple
software only. Auto exposure, and I got that merged. Next step is autofocus. Autofocus
is something which deserves more respect because you really want it tuned. But, well, if you
want to do it simply, you just start from the infinity. You compute the blurriness of
each frame, and you only need to take a look at part of the image if you want to save your
CPU. And you start your sweep. You start to bring the focus closer. And when the image
gets more blurry, well, you stop. You might want to go a little bit back because of the
physical issues of the lens. But this works, well, better than manual focus. And I got
it merged rather quickly. Next step was video. So I decided that I liked the ideas from the
Unixi camera and simply did 0.8 megapixels recording directly to the disk. I hacked millipixels
to save timestamp frames and left post processing after the user presses the stop button. Easy
to do. Obvious to their disadvantages, right? You are now limited by the disk space. And
maybe you could say it's not quite nice to the flash to just stream raw data to it.
But hey, the flash is cheap and the phone will die anyway. Post processing is quite long. It
takes five times slower than recording. I guess this could be optimized. This is again my old
code. So I'm Python with FFmpeg. Ideally, that is hard to do the encoding. We should use it.
But I feel that doing that is awful lot of work. Anyway, this is now upstream. So if you
update your Libram 5, you should be able to take video. And I believe it's important to have
something other than recording. Next thing I want to talk about, which is very exciting,
is face detection autofocus. You may want to Google it for nice explanations.
But basically, they have selected some blue pixels. They are special. And they are special
in a way that they only take light from certain directions. So you have a lens. And if it's focused,
it's okay. The light comes and meets at the sensor. But if you are autofocus, funny stuff happens.
And the light from the left of the image ends up at a different place on the sensor than the light
from the right part of the lens. But if you block the light based on the direction on the chip,
which is easy to do, you can use it for focus. So if you take a line from the sensor, and you have
the on the top, you will have left special pixels. And on the bottom, you have right special
pixels, for example, then you have this, the three, you will see on the line will be at different
positions on different special pixels. Well, and you can use this to focus, right? You just compute
correlation between the two lines. And it directly tells you how much autofocus you are, and in which
direction you should focus. This was great to play with. It was like hacking. Unfortunately,
it is not too usable on LeBron five. They are two issues for the special pixels are quite far apart,
which they basically have to because if you made all the pictures special, you would have you would
lose your resolution. And it only works in the high resolution mode. And you don't want to run
your preview in high resolution mode. So if someone is interested in a fade detection autofocus,
I have the code code this on the on the GitLab somewhere. It was fun experiment, it worked.
But I decided like, for your focus, you would probably do have to do hybrid like
do course focus using the fade detection, and then do contrast detection on the on the end.
Seems like a lot of work. And with the driver, which will only give you 23 frames per second,
and so on. Well, I decided not to take this much. So I have some wish lists. And I think I have like
five minutes left. So five minutes talking or five minutes questions, including everything,
including everything. Okay, so I have a long wish list for all the world. I would like to have
better media control support in the tools because it doesn't work. A piece changed and the tools
didn't catch up. I would like library to get conversions between formats and so on, I would
like better than a bit support. I would like multiple applications accessing the camera at
the same time. Better support would be nice. And someone should really solve the question
problem because that's bad. For live camera, I shouldn't be really hacking the pixels,
I should be helping the camera. But live camera doesn't support software ISP. And I'm not a great
C++ hacker, so I could do it, but they will reject the patches if I do. So I would much prefer them
to do to do the preparation and then I would fill the code. And that's pretty much it. So time for
questions.
Sorry?
Okay, so the comment is that they want my work on software ISP.
And I guess I will want to cooperate, but live camera is not easy to hack for me because of the
C++ stuff. So be patient and I may be... maybe it would be better if someone else did it.
Yes, so well, there will not be much to see. So, you know, Millipix could use some work too,
but I can take pictures. Trust me. I didn't use autofocus for this because...
Yes, I can do it.
Ah, okay. So it's no upstream, so you can just update your operating system and you will get one.
And it should be possible to do just a short video recording too. So now you have all been
recorded and now the CPU is busy converting that. And battery is low now. Yeah, somewhat. Okay, more questions?
Okay, so I guess...